Surah: Al-Fatiha
VERSE: In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the Most Merciful. 
INTERPRETATION: I begin with every Name belonging to Allah, Most High. This is because the word Name is singular and in the genitive form;
therefore it subsumes all of Allah's Beautiful and Perfect Names. "Allah," He is the
God who is worshipped: the one deserving worship to the exclusion of everything else
because of His qualities of divinity, attributes, all of which are perfect. "The AllMerciful, the Most Merciful," these are two Names proving that He, Most High, is
one who possesses a great and all-encompassing mercy that includes everything and
embraces every living being. He has decreed it for those who fear Allah, those who
follow His Prophets and Messengers: these have unrestricted mercy; anyone else only
has a portion of this mercy.



VERSE: All praise (and thanks) are due to Allah
INTERPRETATION: this verse eulogises Allah through His
perfect Attributes and His actions, all of which are based upon beneficence and
justice. To Him belongs perfect and complete praise in every sense. "Lord of the
worlds," the Lord is the One who nourishes and sustains the whole of the creation,
meaning everything besides Allah, by the very fact of His creating them, His granting
them favour after favour, and His gracing them with immense blessings, the absence
of which would preclude any possibility of creation surviving. Every blessing they
possess is from Him, Most High.



VERSE: Master of the Day of Judgement
INTERPRETATION: a master is a person who has the quality of
ownership, from the consequences of which is the ability to command and prohibit,
reward and punish, and to dispose of his subjects and possessions in any way he
wishes. In this verse, mastery has been appended to the Day of Judgement, the Day of
Rising, the Day on which man will be judged for his actions – the good and the bad.
This is because on that Day the completeness and perfection of His mastery, justice
and wisdom will be made clear to all. Moreover, man will realize that any mastery of
created beings has ended, so much so that kings, ministers, slaves and the free-born
will all be the same: all of them yielding to His greatness, rendered in complete
submission before His magnificence, expectant of His recompense, hoping for His
reward and fearing His punishment. The point of mentioning His mastery in this context is to emphasize it, otherwise He is Master of the Day of Judgement and all
other days.



VERSE: You Alone we worship and You Alone we ask for help
INTERPRETATION: meaning that we single
You out Alone for worship and seeking help. This is because mentioning the object at
the head of a verb is a method of constraint (hasr), i.e. affirming what is mentioned in
the sentence and negating it for anything that falls outside. Therefore, it is as if the
person has said, We worship You and we do not worship anything else. We ask You
for help and we do not turn to anyone else for help.
Mentioning worship before asking for help is by way of mentioning the general before
the specific, and to show that attention should be given to His right over the right of
His servant. "Worship" is a collective noun that subsumes all actions and sayings,
outward and inward, that Allah loves and is pleased with. Seeking help, isti`ana, is to
depend upon Allah, Most High, in acquiring that which would benefit and repressing
that which would harm, along with having the certainty that He will actually assist the
petitioner. Living the worship of Allah and seeking His help are the means to everlasting
happiness and security from all evil; there is no path to victory except by meeting the
requirements of these two pillars. Worship can only be considered to be true worship
when done in the way taught by the Messenger (SAW) seeking thereby only Allah's
face. These two conditions have to be present for the action to be considered worship.



VERSE: Guide us (to and on) the Straight Path
INTERPRETATION: show us and direct us to it, grant us the
divine grace to traverse it. The Straight Path is the clear path that leads to Allah and
His Paradise: it is the cognizance of truth and acting by it. Therefore, the verse means:
guide us to the Path and guide us in the Path. Guidance to the Path means to come to
Islam and abandon all other religions. Guidance in the Path means guidance towards
all of the details of Islam in terms of knowledge and action. Hence, this supplication is
one of the most comprehensive and most beneficial supplications, and this is why it is
obligatory to supplicate to Allah with it in every rak`ah of prayer, especially since the
servant is in continuous need of it.



VERSE: the Path of those You have blessed,not the path "of those who have incurred anger, 1:6
INTERPRETATION: This Straight Path is "the Path of those You have blessed" who are the Prophets,
the Sincerely Truthful, the Martyrs and the Righteous "not" the path "of those who
have incurred anger," who knew the truth but abandoned it such as the Jews and
others, "nor" the path "of those astray," who abandoned the truth out of ignorance and
misguidance such as the Christians.



Surah:al Masad
VERSE: Perish the hands of Abu Lahab, and he will perish! His wealth and all that he has earned will not avail him.
He shall soon roast in a flaming fire as will his wife, the wood-carrier, a rope of palm-fibre round her
neck.
INTERPRETATION:Abu Lahab was the uncle of the Prophet (SAW), one of his worst enemies, and one of
the people who harmed him the most. He was not religious, and neither did he feel
any sense of filial obligation towards the Prophet (SAW), may Allah disgrace
him! Allah censured him with this severe rebuke that would be his bane till the Day
of Rising. "Perish the hands of Abu Lahab," i.e. may his hands waste away and may
he be wretched, "and he will perish," indeed he did not gain any profit. "His wealth
and all that he has earned will not avail him," his money and earnings made him
iniquitous and will not aid him at all; they will not avert the Allah"s punishment when
it besets him. "He shall soon roast in a flaming fire," enveloping him from all
directions, "as will his wife, the wood-carrier," she was also someone who harmed the
Messenger of Allah (SAW) greatly.Her and her husband aided each other in sin and
transgression, and they did all they could to harm him (SAW). Her sins have collected
on her back, weighing her down, in the same way as a wood-carrier piles wood on his
back, binding them with a rope of palm-fibre around his neck. The meaning could also
be that she will actually carry wood to fuel the fire burning her husband with "a rope
of palm-fibre round her neck.Whatever the case, this Surah contains a clear miracle from Allah. Allah revealed this
Surah before Abu Lahab"s death and his wife"s death. He informed them that they
would roast in the Fire, which necessarily means that they would never accept Islam.
This is what happened, exactly as the Knower of the unseen and seen informed us!



Surah: al Ikhlas
VERSE:Say: He is Allah, the One and only. Allah, the Everlasting Sustainer of all. He has not given
birth, nor was He born. There is none comparable to Him.
INTERPRETATION:"Say," with certainty, believing it and understanding its meaning, "He is Allah,
the One and only," Oneness is something unique to Him and He is one in every
sense. He is one, singular in His perfection, having the Most Beautiful Names
and perfect Lofty Attributes coupled with pure deeds. There is nothing
comparable to Him or like Him. "Allah, the Everlasting Sustainer of all," the one
who is sought for the fulfilment of all needs. The inhabitants of the lower and
upper world all stand in need of him in the direst of ways. They ask Him for their
needs and they place their hope in Him to fulfil their desires. This is because His
qualities and attributes are perfect: He is the All-Knowing whose knowledge is
perfect, the Forbearing whose forbearance is perfect, and the Most-Merciful
whose mercy encompasses everything. The same applies to all His Attributes.
Part of His perfection is that "He has not given birth, nor was He born," because
He has absolutely no need of anything and "there is none comparable to
Him," not in His Names, or His Attributes or His actions. Blessed and Exalted is
He!



Surah:al Falaq
VERSE: Say: I take refuge with the Lord of daybreak, from the evil of what He created, from the evil of darkness
as it gathers, from the evil of those who blow on knots, and from the evil of the envious when he
envies.
INTERPRETATION:"Say," in order to take refuge "I take refuge" recourse, shelter and hold fast to "the
Lord of daybreak," the Cleaver of the seed and kernel, the Cleaver of the sky at
dawn."From the evil of what He created," all that Allah created: man, jinn and
animal. Therefore one takes refuge with their Creator from the evil they contain.
Next, Allah lists specific cases subsumed by the general import of the previous
verse: "from the evil of darkness as it gathers," i.e. from the evil of what happens at
night when darkness envelops man, when many evil souls and harmful creatures
disperse therein. "From the evil of those who blow on knots," i.e. witches who would
blow on knots to aid them in their sorcery which they had tied in the ways of their
secret art. "From the evil of the envious when he envies," the envier is one who
wishes to see the removal of the blessings he sees in the envied, and does his utmost
to have them removed. Man is therefore in need of seeking refuge from his evil and in 
order to render his plots vain. Included in the category of the envier is someone who
afflicts others with the evil-eye because this only ever emanates from one who is
envious and has an evil nature.
This chapter covers seeking refuge from all types of evil: general and specific. It also
proves that magic is something real, its harm should be feared, and that one should
take refuge with Allah from it and from those who practice it.



Surah: al Nas 
VERSE:Say: I take refuge with the Lord of mankind, the King of mankind, the God of mankind from the evil
of the stealthy Whisperer, beating a retreat, who whispers in people"s breasts, (coming) from the jinn
and man
INTERPRETATION:"Say: I take refuge with the Lord of mankind, the King of mankind, the God of
mankind," this chapter deals with seeking refuge with the Lord and King of mankind,
the God of mankind, from Shaytan who is the source of all evil. "From the evil of the
stealthy Whisperer, beating a retreat, who whispers in people"s breasts," some of the
multifarious facets of his evil are that he whispers into the hearts of man, adorns evil,
presenting it to them in an alluring guise, and incites them towards performing it. He
is always whispering but beats a retreat when the servant remembers Allah, seeking
His assistance in repressing him. Therefore, it is incumbent upon a person to turn to
Allah for aid, to take refuge with Him, and to seek recourse with His Lordship. All of
mankind fall under the realm of His Lordship, rububiyyah, and sovereignty; He has
taken hold of every creature by the forelock.
Man must also take recourse with His Divinity, uluhiyyah, for it was for His worship
that he was created. This worship, however, cannot be perfected until and unless he
represses the evil of his enemy who desires to cut him off from his goal, obstructing
him from it, and who wants him to follow him, thereby becoming a denizen of the
Scorching Blaze.
Whispering could occur from jinn or from man and this why Allah says, "(coming)
from the jinn and man."



Surah: al Nasr
VERSE:When Allah"s help and victory arrive, and you see people embracing Allah"s religion in crowds, then
glorify your Lord, all the while praising Him, and ask His forgiveness. He is the Ever-Returning.
INTERPRETATION: This noble chapter bears glad-tidings for the Messenger of Allah and a command
when he sees their fruition; it also contains an indication of what follows next from
these glad-tidings. The glad-tidings are tidings of Allah"s aiding His Messenger, the
conquest of Mecca and people embracing true faith in crowds, "When Allah"s help
and victory arrive and you see people embracing Allah"s religion in crowds,"many of whom will be from his tribe and family after having been his antagonists. This
occurred. The command is to show gratitude to his Lord, then glorify your Lord, all the while
praising Him, and ask His forgiveness.
The indication of what will follow on from this is two-fold: the first is that victory will
remain for the religion and it will increase with the Messenger of Allah glorifying and
praising Allah and asking His forgiveness. This is an expression of gratitude about
which Allah says, "If you are grateful, I will grant you increase."[2] This fact was also
actualised in the time of the Rightly Guided Khalifs and after them. This aid remained
until Islam spread to an extent that no other religion had spread, and nations and
people embraced the religion as had not been done for any other religion. Then, this
nation began to oppose the command of Allah and they were tried with splitting and
discord; then what followed followed. Yet, despite this, Allah still shows this nation
and religion mercy and kindness the extent of which does not even cross the mind!
The second is that the Messenger of Allah was soon to pass away. This is because his
life is a noble life which Allah Himself took an oath by. It is known in Islam that
noble matters are completed by asking Allah"s forgiveness as we see in the case of
prayer and Hajj for example. Allah"s ordering the Prophet (SAW) to praise Him and
ask forgiveness while in this state indicates that his time has come and that he should
now prepare himself for the meeting with his Lord and that he should end his life with
one of the best deeds. May Allah shower abundant peace and blessings upon him!
He would frequently implement this verse of the Qur"an in his ruku` and sujud by
saying, "Glory be to Allah, our Lord, and all praise; O Allah forgive me



Surah:al Kafirun
VERSE: Say: O disbelievers! I do not worship what you worship,  and you do not worship what I worship.  I
will never worship what you worship, and you will never worship what I worship. You have your religion
and I have mine
INTERPRETATION:"Say: O disbelievers!" openly and clearly "I do not worship what you worship," I
clear myself of what you worship, outwardly and inwardly "and you do not worship
what I worship," because you do not worship Allah sincerely, alone. Your worship of
Him, mixed as it is with the worship of others besides Him, cannot truly be called
worship. "I will never worship what you worship, and you will never worship what I
worship," this sentence has been repeated. The first instance shows that what is said is
a statement of fact, the act will not happen. The second instance shows that the state
of affairs has now been set in stone. It is for this reason that Allah proceeds to
differentiate the two groups by saying, "You have your religion and I have mine," just
as Allah says, "Say, „Each man acts according to his nature, but your Lord knows best
who is best guided on the Path"" and "If they deny you, say, „I have my actions and
you have your actions. You are not responsible for what I do and I am not responsible
for what you do.



Surah:al Kawthar
VERSE:Truly We have given you Abundance. So pray to your Lord and sacrifice. The one who hates you, he
has been cut off.
INTERPRETATION:Allah says to his Prophet, Muhammad (SAW), "Truly We have given you
Abundance," great good and immense grace. Part of this goodness and grace is the
river that he (SAW) was given called al-Kawtharand the Pond ( Hawd) whose breadth
and width is the distance of one month"s journey; its water is whiter than milk and its
taste sweeter than honey; its vessels number the amount of stars in the sky and
resemble them in radiance. Whoever drinks from it, be it just one sip, will never be
thirsty again. After mentioning the blessings conferred him (SAW), Allah orders him to show
gratitude, "so pray to your Lord and sacrifice," these two have been specifically
mentioned because they are two of the best acts of worship and means of drawing
close to Allah. The prayer comprises submission of the heart and limbs to Allah and
the body's moving from one posture of servitude to another. Sacrifice comprises the
servant drawing closer to Allah by his sacrificing the best animals he has and
expending his wealth which man naturally loves and hoards. "The one who hates
you," abhors you, censures you and devalues your true status "he has been cut off," of
all good. His deeds will be severed and his acclaim forgotten. As for Muhammad
(SAW), he is the perfect man, reaching the heights of human perfection. His acclaim
will be heralded everywhere and his followers and helpers will be many.



Surah: Al-Naba
VERSE: What are they asking one another about? About the
Grave Tidings, concerning which they are in disagreement, no indeed, but they will soon know, Again, no indeed, but they will soon know!
INTERPRETATION: What are they those who deny the Signs of Allah "asking one another about?" The answer follows, "About the Grave Tidings," the momentous news "concerning which they are in disagreement" about which they had lengthy debate, held widely disparate views and the discord of which had spread far and wide. This is because they denied the news and met it with incredulity. However, this news is not something that is subject to uncertainty and does not admit any doubt. Therefore, the reality is that those who deny the meeting with their Lord will never believe, even if every Sign comes to them, until they themselves see the Painful Punishment. "No indeed, but they will soon know! Again, no indeed, but they will soon know!" they will soon know what they used to deny when the punishment descends upon them, when they are "flung (disdainfully) into the Fire of Hell," and they will be told, "This is the Fire which you used to deny!



VERSE: Have We not made the earth a level expanse, and the mountains pegs?, We created you in pairs, We appointed your sleep as a time of rest, We appointed night as a garment, and We appointed day for livelihood,  We built seven mighty [heavens] above you, and We fixed a blazing lamp [there], We sent down cascading water from rain-laden clouds,that We may bring forth grain and vegetation with it,and gardens thick with entwined growth.
INTERPRETATION:Then Allah, Most High, mentions His blessings and the evidences pointing to the truth of His Messengers. He says, "Have We not made the earth a level expanse," have we not granted you magnificent blessings such as leveling the earth and making it subservient to you? Have we not subjected it to you that you may extract crops from it, build residences and roadways for your own benefit? "And the mountains as pegs," making the earth firm so that it does not shake and sway under you. "We have created you in pairs," male and female, of the same type, that one may find rest with the other, that love and mercy may ensue as a result of which offspring are born; the pleasure in the act of marital relations being yet another blessing. "We have appointed your sleep as a time of rest," a cessation of your activities and a repose for you. "We have appointed night as a garment," man would be harmed were his activity perpetual and unceasing, so Allah appointed the night and sleep as a means to cover him such that his motions, which would end up harming him, may find stillness and that he may find repose. "We have appointed day for livelihood. We built seven mighty [heavens] above you," i.e. seven heavens, mighty, firm and unshakable. Allah holds them up by His power, making them like a roof for the earth. They contain many benefits,amongst which is the sun: "and We fixed a blazing lamp [there]," referring to it as"blazing" to highlight its quality of light which is necessary for the existence of man and as a "lamp" to highlight its heat which is also beneficial for man. "We sent down cascading water from the rain-laden clouds that We may bring forth grain" such as wheat, barley, rice and other edible produce, "and vegetation with it," all types of plants which Allah has made fodder for animals. "And gardens thick with entwined growth," intertwined growth containing every type of delicious fruit. How can you disbelieve in the One who has granted these magnificent blessings, the extent of which none can hope to estimate let alone count? How can you deny what He informs you of with regards the Resurrection? How can you use His blessings todisobey Him and deny them?



VERSE: Indeed, the Day of Decision is an appointed time. On the Day the Trumpet is blown, you will come forth in multitudes, and heaven is opened up, becoming apertures, and the mountains are set in motion, becoming a mirage.
INTERPRETATION: Allah, Most High, proceeds to mention what will occur on the Day of Rising about which the deniers are asking each other and the obdurate are rejecting. It is a momentous Day, "Indeed, the Day of Decision is an appointed time," for creation. "On the Day the Trumpet is blown, you will come forth in multitudes, and heaven is opened up, becoming apertures, and the mountains are set in motion, becoming a mirage," during this Day such violent and terrifying events are set in motion as would turn the hair of a babe white and beset hearts with utter confusion and dismay. Mountains will be shaken until they become"scattered dust" and the heaven will be rent asunder such that it"becomes apertures". On that Day, Allah will judge between all creatures with His judgment that cannot be wrong or unjust, and the Fire of Hell which Allah has made a place of ambush and a homecoming for the transgressors will be kindled to a blaze.



VERSE: Truly, Hell lies in ambush, for the transgressors, a final place of return: abiding in there for [countless] ages. There they will not taste any coolness or drink, save boiling water and [foul] pus: a fitting recompense!  They were not expecting a reckoning, and they roundly denied Our Signs, but We have listed everything in a Book. "So taste this! We will only ever increase you in torment."
INTERPRETATION: "Truly, Hell lies in ambush, for the transgressors, a final place of return: abiding in there for [countless] ages," meaning many many ages, the meaning of age (haqb) here, in the view of many exegetes, is eighty years. When they enter it, "There they will not taste any coolness or drink," not receiving what would cool their skins or quench their thirst. "Save boiling water" that would scald their faces and rip open their stomachs "and a scalding pus:" the pus of the denizens of Hell: a truly vile liquid with a foul taste. This atrocious punishment is "a fitting recompense" for what they worked. Allah will not wrong them in the slightest; rather it was they who wronged themselves. This is why Allah proceeds to mention their deeds which made them deserving of this recompense, "They were not expecting a reckoning," they did not believe in the Resurrection or that Allah would recompense creation for the good and bad that they worked. For this reason they neglected to work for the Hereafter, "and they roundly denied Our Signs,"they clearly denied them, leaving no shadow of doubt that would indicate otherwise. The clear proofs came to them but they obstinatelydenied them. "But We have listed everything" small and large, insignificant and significant, good and evil, "in a Book," i.e. We have recorded it in the Preserved Tablet. Therefore let not the sinners think that We have punished them for sins they did not commit, neither let them think that any of their deeds will be lost or forgotten – no, not even an atoms weight! "And the Book is placed, and you will see the guilty fearful of that which is therein, and they say, „What kind of a Book is this that leaves not a small thing nor a great thing but takes account thereof! And they find all  that they did confronting them, and your Lord wrongs no-one. "So," you deniers "taste this," painful punishment and perpetual anguish. "We will only ever increase you in torment," each period of time brings with it an increase in punishment. This verse is one of the most severe verses depicting the punishment of the Fire, may Allah save us from it.



VERSE: For those mindful of Allah there is salvation:Gardens and vineyards, maidens, nubile and alike of age,  and an overflowing cup. There they will hear no vain speech or falsehood -  a reward from your Lord, a gift more than fitting: Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything between them, the AllMerciful, from whom they hold no [right] of address.
INTERPRETATION: After having mentioned the state of the sinners, Allah mentions the end of those with taqwa, "For those mindful of Allah there is salvation," i.e. those who ward off the displeasure of their Lord by adhering firmly to His obedience and shunning disobedience, for them is success and victory, and distance from the Fire. Part of this victory is, "Gardens," containing all types of luscious vegetation giving forthfruit,"and vineyards," with rivers sprouting from them. Grapes have been specifically mentioned because of their excellence and because they are present in plenitude in those Gardens. "Maidens, nubile" full breasted women whose bosom never loses its firmness, eternally youthful and beautiful "and alike of age," i.e. of one age. The norm for people who are atrab is that they are sociable and companionable, their age is thirty-three which is the pinnacle of youth. "And an overflowing cup," with the choicest wine,"delicious to the drinkers". "There they will hear no vain speech," words that contain no benefit, "or falsehood" words calling to sin. Allah says, "There hear they no vain speaking or sinful discourse." Allah gave them this magnificent reward out of His beneficence and grace, "a reward from your Lord, a gift more than fitting," by reason of their deeds which Allah guided them to and made to be a cause leading to His grace. He is their Lord, "Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them," who created them and regulated them, "the All-Merciful," whose mercy extends to everything. Hence He nurtured them and extended His mercy to them until they attained this state of felicity. Then He mentioned His greatness and His Kingship on the Day of Judgment, "from whom they no [right] of address," except "for the one the All-Merciful permits and says
what is right." Therefore none will be able to speak unless he meets these two prerequisites: Allah grants him leave to speak and he speaks rightly. This is
because "That is the Day of Truth," the day when falsehood cannot be circulated and
lying is of no benefit.



VERSE:  On the Day when the Spirit and the angels will stand in ranks, they will not speak except for one who the All Merciful permits and says what is right.  That is the Day of Truth; so whoever wants to should take a way back to his Lord. Indeed We have warned you of an imminent punishment, on the Day when a man will bserve what his own hands have sent before him and the disbeliever will cry out, „Oh, if only I were dust!
INTERPRETATION: "On the Day when the Spirit," Jibril, the best of the angels "and the angels will stand in ranks," submissively before Allah. "They will not speak except for one who the All-Merciful permits and says what is right." After having encouraged and discouraged, and given glad-tidings and warned, He says, "That is the Day of Truth; so whoever wants to should take a way back to his Lord," with deeds and a truthful footing to which he can recourse on the Day of Judgement. "Indeed We have warned you of an imminent punishment," because it is approaching and everything that is approaching is imminent, "on the Day when a man will observe what his own hands have sent before him," being concerned with it and being terrified of it. So look in this abode to what you are preparing for the Eternal Abode! "O you who believe! Observe your duty to Allah and let every soul look to that which it sends on before for the morrow. And observe your duty to Allah, Allah is well-informed of what you do." Then, whoever finds good, let him praise Allah; and whoever finds other than that, he has none to blame but himself. It is for this reason that the disbelievers will wish for death by reason of their extreme sorrow and anguish, "and the disbeliever will cry out,Oh, if only I were dust!. We ask Allah to deliver us from disbelief and all evil. He is the Bestower of Good, the Kind.



Surah: Al-Naba
VERSE: What are they asking one another about? About the
Grave Tidings, concerning which they are in disagreement, no indeed, but they will soon know, Again, no indeed, but they will soon know!
INTERPRETATION: What are they those who deny the Signs of Allah "asking one another about?" The answer follows, "About the Grave Tidings," the momentous news "concerning which they are in disagreement" about which they had lengthy debate, held widely disparate views and the discord of which had spread far and wide. This is because they denied the news and met it with incredulity. However, this news is not something that is subject to uncertainty and does not admit any doubt. Therefore, the reality is that those who deny the meeting with their Lord will never believe, even if every Sign comes to them, until they themselves see the Painful Punishment. "No indeed, but they will soon know! Again, no indeed, but they will soon know!" they will soon know what they used to deny when the punishment descends upon them, when they are "flung (disdainfully) into the Fire of Hell," and they will be told, "This is the Fire which you used to deny!



VERSE: Have We not made the earth a level expanse, and the mountains pegs?, We created you in pairs, We appointed your sleep as a time of rest, We appointed night as a garment, and We appointed day for livelihood,  We built seven mighty [heavens] above you, and We fixed a blazing lamp [there], We sent down cascading water from rain-laden clouds,that We may bring forth grain and vegetation with it,and gardens thick with entwined growth.
INTERPRETATION:Then Allah, Most High, mentions His blessings and the evidences pointing to the truth of His Messengers. He says, "Have We not made the earth a level expanse," have we not granted you magnificent blessings such as leveling the earth and making it subservient to you? Have we not subjected it to you that you may extract crops from it, build residences and roadways for your own benefit? "And the mountains as pegs," making the earth firm so that it does not shake and sway under you. "We have created you in pairs," male and female, of the same type, that one may find rest with the other, that love and mercy may ensue as a result of which offspring are born; the pleasure in the act of marital relations being yet another blessing. "We have appointed your sleep as a time of rest," a cessation of your activities and a repose for you. "We have appointed night as a garment," man would be harmed were his activity perpetual and unceasing, so Allah appointed the night and sleep as a means to cover him such that his motions, which would end up harming him, may find stillness and that he may find repose. "We have appointed day for livelihood. We built seven mighty [heavens] above you," i.e. seven heavens, mighty, firm and unshakable. Allah holds them up by His power, making them like a roof for the earth. They contain many benefits,amongst which is the sun: "and We fixed a blazing lamp [there]," referring to it as"blazing" to highlight its quality of light which is necessary for the existence of man and as a "lamp" to highlight its heat which is also beneficial for man. "We sent down cascading water from the rain-laden clouds that We may bring forth grain" such as wheat, barley, rice and other edible produce, "and vegetation with it," all types of plants which Allah has made fodder for animals. "And gardens thick with entwined growth," intertwined growth containing every type of delicious fruit. How can you disbelieve in the One who has granted these magnificent blessings, the extent of which none can hope to estimate let alone count? How can you deny what He informs you of with regards the Resurrection? How can you use His blessings todisobey Him and deny them?



VERSE: Indeed, the Day of Decision is an appointed time. On the Day the Trumpet is blown, you will come forth in multitudes, and heaven is opened up, becoming apertures, and the mountains are set in motion, becoming a mirage.
INTERPRETATION: Allah, Most High, proceeds to mention what will occur on the Day of Rising about which the deniers are asking each other and the obdurate are rejecting. It is a momentous Day, "Indeed, the Day of Decision is an appointed time," for creation. "On the Day the Trumpet is blown, you will come forth in multitudes, and heaven is opened up, becoming apertures, and the mountains are set in motion, becoming a mirage," during this Day such violent and terrifying events are set in motion as would turn the hair of a babe white and beset hearts with utter confusion and dismay. Mountains will be shaken until they become"scattered dust" and the heaven will be rent asunder such that it"becomes apertures". On that Day, Allah will judge between all creatures with His judgment that cannot be wrong or unjust, and the Fire of Hell which Allah has made a place of ambush and a homecoming for the transgressors will be kindled to a blaze.



VERSE: Truly, Hell lies in ambush, for the transgressors, a final place of return: abiding in there for [countless] ages. There they will not taste any coolness or drink, save boiling water and [foul] pus: a fitting recompense!  They were not expecting a reckoning, and they roundly denied Our Signs, but We have listed everything in a Book. "So taste this! We will only ever increase you in torment."
INTERPRETATION: "Truly, Hell lies in ambush, for the transgressors, a final place of return: abiding in there for [countless] ages," meaning many many ages, the meaning of age (haqb) here, in the view of many exegetes, is eighty years. When they enter it, "There they will not taste any coolness or drink," not receiving what would cool their skins or quench their thirst. "Save boiling water" that would scald their faces and rip open their stomachs "and a scalding pus:" the pus of the denizens of Hell: a truly vile liquid with a foul taste. This atrocious punishment is "a fitting recompense" for what they worked. Allah will not wrong them in the slightest; rather it was they who wronged themselves. This is why Allah proceeds to mention their deeds which made them deserving of this recompense, "They were not expecting a reckoning," they did not believe in the Resurrection or that Allah would recompense creation for the good and bad that they worked. For this reason they neglected to work for the Hereafter, "and they roundly denied Our Signs,"they clearly denied them, leaving no shadow of doubt that would indicate otherwise. The clear proofs came to them but they obstinatelydenied them. "But We have listed everything" small and large, insignificant and significant, good and evil, "in a Book," i.e. We have recorded it in the Preserved Tablet. Therefore let not the sinners think that We have punished them for sins they did not commit, neither let them think that any of their deeds will be lost or forgotten – no, not even an atoms weight! "And the Book is placed, and you will see the guilty fearful of that which is therein, and they say, „What kind of a Book is this that leaves not a small thing nor a great thing but takes account thereof! And they find all  that they did confronting them, and your Lord wrongs no-one. "So," you deniers "taste this," painful punishment and perpetual anguish. "We will only ever increase you in torment," each period of time brings with it an increase in punishment. This verse is one of the most severe verses depicting the punishment of the Fire, may Allah save us from it.



VERSE: For those mindful of Allah there is salvation:Gardens and vineyards, maidens, nubile and alike of age,  and an overflowing cup. There they will hear no vain speech or falsehood -  a reward from your Lord, a gift more than fitting: Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything between them, the AllMerciful, from whom they hold no [right] of address.
INTERPRETATION: After having mentioned the state of the sinners, Allah mentions the end of those with taqwa, "For those mindful of Allah there is salvation," i.e. those who ward off the displeasure of their Lord by adhering firmly to His obedience and shunning disobedience, for them is success and victory, and distance from the Fire. Part of this victory is, "Gardens," containing all types of luscious vegetation giving forthfruit,"and vineyards," with rivers sprouting from them. Grapes have been specifically mentioned because of their excellence and because they are present in plenitude in those Gardens. "Maidens, nubile" full breasted women whose bosom never loses its firmness, eternally youthful and beautiful "and alike of age," i.e. of one age. The norm for people who are atrab is that they are sociable and companionable, their age is thirty-three which is the pinnacle of youth. "And an overflowing cup," with the choicest wine,"delicious to the drinkers". "There they will hear no vain speech," words that contain no benefit, "or falsehood" words calling to sin. Allah says, "There hear they no vain speaking or sinful discourse." Allah gave them this magnificent reward out of His beneficence and grace, "a reward from your Lord, a gift more than fitting," by reason of their deeds which Allah guided them to and made to be a cause leading to His grace. He is their Lord, "Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them," who created them and regulated them, "the All-Merciful," whose mercy extends to everything. Hence He nurtured them and extended His mercy to them until they attained this state of felicity. Then He mentioned His greatness and His Kingship on the Day of Judgment, "from whom they no [right] of address," except "for the one the All-Merciful permits and says
what is right." Therefore none will be able to speak unless he meets these two prerequisites: Allah grants him leave to speak and he speaks rightly. This is
because "That is the Day of Truth," the day when falsehood cannot be circulated and
lying is of no benefit.



VERSE:  On the Day when the Spirit and the angels will stand in ranks, they will not speak except for one who the All Merciful permits and says what is right.  That is the Day of Truth; so whoever wants to should take a way back to his Lord. Indeed We have warned you of an imminent punishment, on the Day when a man will bserve what his own hands have sent before him and the disbeliever will cry out, „Oh, if only I were dust!
INTERPRETATION: "On the Day when the Spirit," Jibril, the best of the angels "and the angels will stand in ranks," submissively before Allah. "They will not speak except for one who the All-Merciful permits and says what is right." After having encouraged and discouraged, and given glad-tidings and warned, He says, "That is the Day of Truth; so whoever wants to should take a way back to his Lord," with deeds and a truthful footing to which he can recourse on the Day of Judgement. "Indeed We have warned you of an imminent punishment," because it is approaching and everything that is approaching is imminent, "on the Day when a man will observe what his own hands have sent before him," being concerned with it and being terrified of it. So look in this abode to what you are preparing for the Eternal Abode! "O you who believe! Observe your duty to Allah and let every soul look to that which it sends on before for the morrow. And observe your duty to Allah, Allah is well-informed of what you do." Then, whoever finds good, let him praise Allah; and whoever finds other than that, he has none to blame but himself. It is for this reason that the disbelievers will wish for death by reason of their extreme sorrow and anguish, "and the disbeliever will cry out,Oh, if only I were dust!. We ask Allah to deliver us from disbelief and all evil. He is the Bestower of Good, the Kind.



Surah: Al-naziat
VERSE: By those who wrench out from the very roots, by those who tenderly draw out, by those who glide along serenely, by those who race along, speeding ahead, and by those who arrange a matter.
INTERPRETATION: "By those who wrench out from the very roots," these are the angels who pluck out souls forcefully such that they be recompensed for their deeds, engrossed in their duty and diligently carrying it out. "By those who tenderly draw out," these are also angels that draw out souls forcefully and vigorously, or these specifically draw out the souls of the believers whereas the wrenching is reserved for the souls of the disbelievers. "By those who glide along" frequently descending and ascending "serenely, by those who race along," racing others "speeding ahead," rushing to obey Allah and hence convey the revelation to the Messengers before the devils can steal a hearing, thereby outstripping them. "And by those who arrange a matter," the angels whom Allah has appointed to regulate the affairs of this creation such as rain, plants, winds, oceans, foetuses, animals, Paradise, Hell and other such matters.



VERSE:On the Day when the Blast thunders,following this, the [Blast] riding behind: that Day hearts will be pounding, their eyes downcast. They say,What! Will we be restored to how we were before?...When we have become decayed bones?! They say, „[Bah!] That, then, would be a ruinous turn of events. There will be but one Cry, and suddenly they will be above ground, wide awake!
INTERPRETATION:"On the Day when the Blast" heralding the Last Hour "thunders, following this, the [Blast] riding behind," another blast following the first. "That Day hearts will be pounding" in terror at what they see and hear. "Their eyes downcast," humbled and abased, their hearts overcome with fear, their very core stunned by the horror around them, regret overtaking them, anguish and loss hemming them in. "They" the disbelievers "say," mockingly and arrogantly, What! Will we be restored to how we were before?" Shall we return to our first form after having died? The question is asked incredulously, by way of rejection. They rejected the Resurrection and then persisted in their denial by saying...When we have become decayed bones?! Are we to be given life again after we have become "bones, rotted away" "They say,
„[Bah!] That, then, would be a ruinous turn of events. They considered it extremely unlikely that such an event would occur, betraying their ignorance of the power of
Allah and intrepidly displaying their insolence before Him. Allah responds by declaring how easy this is for Him, "There will be but one Cry," a blast of the
Trumpet "and suddenly they" all of creation "will be above ground," on the surface of the earth "looking on," "standing and looking on!" Allah will gather them together and judge them with His perfect justice and then recompense them.



VERSE:Has the story of Moses reached you? When his Lord called out to him in the sacred valley, Tuwa,  "Go to Pharaoh, he has transgressed, and ask him, Are you [disposed] to purify yourself, and have me guide you to your Lord so you may fear [Him]? Then he showed him the Greatest Sign, but he denied and disobeyed. Then he turned his back, striving [to counter truth]. Then he mustered [his people] and called out, he said,I am your lord most high. So Allah seized him with an exemplary punishment in this world and the next.  There is a lesson in this for anyone who fears [Allah].
INTERPRETATION: Allah says to His Prophet, Muhammad (SAW), "Has the story of Moses reached you?" The question is asked in order to highlight the magnitude of the incident and to show that it really happened. "When his Lord called out to him in the sacred valley, Tuwa," the place where Allah spoke to him, conferred messengership upon him, commissioned him with the revelation and chose him. ""Go to Pharaoh, he has indeed transgressed," forbid him from his transgression, shirk and disobedience with lenient, gentle words so that "hopefully he may pay heed or fear (Allah)."[3] "And ask him, Are you [disposed] to purify yourself," do you have the resolve to take on fine traits and praiseworthy qualities the likes of which all intelligent folk would compete for? These are that you purify yourself and cleanse it of the stain of disbelief and transgression, and then progress into the light of faith and righteous action. "And have me guide you to your Lord," I will direct you to Him and show you the ways and means of pleasing Him and differentiate these from the ways and means of earning His displeasure "so you may fear (Him), however Pharaoh refused to accept the call of Musa, "then he showed him the Greatest Sign," the genus of Great Signs, as such this verse does contradict the fact that there were a number of such signs, "but he denied" the truth "and disobeyed" His command. "Then he turned his back, striving," expending his efforts in countering the truth and declaring war against it. "Then he mustered" his forces "and called out. He said," to them "„I am your Lord Most High!so submit to him and accept his falsehood and his looking down on them. "So Allah seized him with an exemplary punishment in this world and the next," Allah made His punishment a proof and a warning, demonstrating the punishment that occurs in this life and the next. "There is a lesson in this for anyone who fears [Allah]," it is the person who fears Allah that truly benefits from the Signs and admonitions. Therefore when such-a-one sees the punishment of Pharaoh, he comes to know that a person who is exultant, arrogant, disobedient, and competes with Allah in His dominion will be punished in this life and the Hereafter. As for the person whose heart is devoid of the fear of Allah, even if every Sign comes to him, he will not believe.



VERSE: Are you a more difficult creation or is the heaven? He constructed it. He raised its ceiling high and proportioned it. He darkened its night and brought out its morning light. After that He spread out the earth, He brought forth its water and its pasture from it, and the mountains He firmly anchored - for you and your livestock to enjoy.
INTERPRETATION: Allah then proceeds to mention a clear proof for those who reject the Resurrection, "Are you" man "a more difficult creation or the heaven?" of immense
volume, great strength and dazzling height, "He constructed it. He raised its ceiling high" raising its size and form "and proportioned it," with a precision and perfection that befuddles the mind and bewilders the intelligent. "He darkened its night," such that the night spreads across the face of the earth, reaching every region "and brought out its morning light" with the light of the sun so that man goes out to fulfil what he needs for his religious and worldly life. "After that" the creation of the heaven "He spread out the earth," placing in it its benefits which are explained as "He brought forth its water and its pasture from it, and the mountains He firmly anchored - for you and your livestock to enjoy." Therefore the earth was spread after the creation of the heaven, however the actual creation of the earth occurred before the creation of the heaven as is proven by the verse,"Say, Disbelieve you in Him who created the earth in two days, and ascribe rivals to Him?" That (and none else) is the Lord of the Worlds! He placed therein firmly embedded mountains, towering above it, and blessed it and measured therein its sustenance in four days, alike for (all) who ask; then turned He to the heaven when it was smoke, and said to it and the earth, Come both of you, willingly or unwillingly." They said, „We come in willing obedience."Then He ordained them seven heavens in two days and inspired in each heaven its
mandate; and We adorned the celestial heaven with lamps, and guarded it." Therefore the One who created the seven heavens in all their splendour and the lamps
and celestial bodies they contain, and who created the earth and all it contains is definitely able to resurrect the creation and recompense those who are legally
responsible (mukallaf) for their deeds. Whoever worked righteousness, for him lies in store great good, and whoever worked evil, he has none to blame but himself. 



VERSE:  But when the Great Calamity comes to pass,  that Day man will remember what he strove for, and the Blazing Furnace will be displayed for all who can see. Then, as for him who transgressed and preferred the life of this world, the Blazing Furnace will be [his] shelter. But as for him who feared the standing before his Lord and forbade the self its lust, the Garden will be [his] shelter.
INTERPRETATION:"But when the Great Calamity comes to pass," the Great Judgement, the Severe Hardship – a hardship that renders all other hardships insignificant. It is at this time that a parent shall forget his child, a friend shall forget his friend, and a lover shall forget his beloved. "That Day man will remember what he strove for," in this world of good and evil. He will hope for any increase in his good deeds, even an atoms weight, and any addition to his evil deeds, even an atoms weight, will cause him despair and misery. It is then that he will realise that the foundation of real profit and loss lay in what he strove for in this world. On that occasion every means and every tie that existed in this world will be severed; except for deeds. "And the Blazing Furnace will be displayed for all who can see," prepared for its denizens, ready to seize them, waiting for the command of its Lord. "Then, as for him who transgressed" boldly committing major sins and not restricting himself to the limits set by Allah, "and preferred the life of this world,"over the Hereafter such that he strove for the world and devoted his time and efforts in running after it and its allures, forgetting the Hereafter and neglecting to work towards it, "the Blazing Furnace will be [his] shelter," his home and final place. "But as for him who feared the standing before his Lord," feared the time when he would stand before Him, and feared His just judgment to such an extent that it affected his heart, "and the self its lust," that diverts it from the obedience of Allah and strove against desires and lusts such that his desires
conformed to what Messenger (SAW) came with "The Garden,"containing every type of goodness, joy, and bliss "will be [his]" the one who has these
characteristics "shelter."



VERSE: They ask you about the Hour,When will it arrive?"But how can you tell them? Its coming to pass is your Lord"s affair. You are merely a warner to those who fear it. On the Day they see it, it will seem they had only lingered but an evening or the morning after.
INTERPRETATION:"They" the obstinate deniers of the Resurrection "ask you about the Hour: „When will it arrive?"" Allah replies by saying, "But how can you tell them?" What is the benefitfor you and for them in mentioning this and knowing when it will occur? There is no real point to this question. Now, because there is no benefit in the creation knowing the answer to this question, rather the benefit lies in them not knowing it, Allah kept the knowledge of it to Himself, "Its coming to pass is your Lord"s affair," i.e. itsknowledge belongs to Him alone. He says, "They ask you about the Hour, when will it arrive? Say, „Knowledge thereof is with my Lord only. He alone will manifest it at its proper time. "You are merely a Warner to those who fear it," your warning will only benefit those who fear its occurrence and dread the standing before Allah. The only concern of these people is preparation for that event and working towards it. As for the one who does not believe in it, he pays no attention to it and neither does he pay attention to his obstinacy. This is because his obstinacy arises because of denial and obduracy. When a person reaches such a state and then asks the question, to answer him is useless, and the Wisest of the Wise is free of him. "On the Day they see it, it will seem they had only lingered but an evening or the morning after."



Surah: Abasa
VERSE:  He frowned and turned away because the blind man came his way. But, for all you know, he mightwell purify (himself), or, profiting from the Reminder, take heed. As for him who thinks himselfwithout need,  to him are you fully attentive, yet you are not [responsible] if he does not purify (himself). But as for him who came to you in earnestendeavour, fearful [of Allah], to him are you inattentive.
INTERPRETATION:The reason for the revelation of these noble verses was that a blind believer came to the Prophet (SAW) to ask him questions and to learn from him. At the same time an affluent man came to him. The Prophet (SAW) was always desirous of guiding people to Islam and so he devoted his attention to the rich person and ignored the indigent blind man in the hope of guiding the former. As a result Allah sent down these verses reprimanding him in a gentle manner. "He frowned" showing it on his face "and turned" his body "away because the blind man came his way." Then Allah mentioned the benefit that lay in his attending to him: "But, for all you know, he" the blind man "might well purify (himself)," cleanse himself of lowly mannerisms and adorn himself with beautiful mannerisms, "or take heed, profiting from the reminder?" This is a great point of benefit and it is the purpose of the sending of Messengers, the purpose of giving admonition, and the purpose of reminding. Therefore attending to one who comes to you, desirous of such admonition and reminder, and is attentive, is more befitting and deserving. "As forhim who thinks himself without need, to him are you fully attentive," attending to a person who thinks himself self-sufficient, who is not asking, who is not desirous of good, coupled with your ignoring one who is more important than he is not befitting. "Yet you are not [responsible] if he is not purified," there is no blame on you if he grows not in purity; hence if does not become pure, you are not held accountable for the evil that he works. "But as for him who came to you in earnest endeavour, fearful [of Allah], to him are you inattentive," this then points to a wellknown principle, something known should not be left for something possible. A benefit that is real should not be left for a benefit that is a mere possibility." This also points to the fact that one should more attentive to a student of knowledge, desirous of
knowledge and in need of it, than any other person.



VERSE:No indeed! It is a reminder; so whoever wants to can remember it. [Inscribed] in honoured pages,  exalted and purified, by the hands of scribes,  noble and virtuous.
INTERPRETATION: "No indeed! It is a reminder," from Allah in all truth, by it He admonishes His servants. He shows them, through His Book, what they are in need of and He clarifies right guidance from straying. "So whoever wants to can remember it," i.e. act by it as Allah says, "Say, „The truth is from your Lord": Therefore let him who will believe, and let him who will, disbelieve." Then Allah mentions the place of this admonition, its greatness and its sanctity: "(Inscribed) in honoured pages, exalted," in ranking and esteem "and purified," from defect, from being harmed by the devils or their eavesdropping (and stealing), "by the hands of scribes," the angels who are the envoys of Allah between Him and His servants, "noble," full of goodness and blessings "and righteous," in heart and deed.



VERSE: Woe to man, how ungrateful he is! From what substance did He create him?  From a sperm-drop He created him, then proportioned him. Then He makes the way easy for him. Then He causes his death and stows him in a grave. Then, when He wills, He will raise him. No, indeed! Man has not yet fulfilled what He commanded him.
INTERPRETATION: "Woe to man! How ungrateful he is" of Allah"s blessing and how severe is he in his rejection of the truth after it has been made plain! But what is he? He is one of the weakest of creatures, created from "fluid (held) despicable" "From what substance did He create him? From a sperm-drop He created him, then proportioned him," into a well-formed man and precisely formulated his inner and outer strengths and abilities. "Then He makes the way easy for him," makes the worldly and religious things easy for him, guides him to the Path and tests him with command and prohibition. "Then He causes his death and stows him in a grave," honouring him with burial and not leaving him to rot on the surface of the earth like all other animals. "Then, when He wills, He will raise him," from the dead for the
Recompense. Allah alone regulates the affairs of man and does what has been previously mentioned, none shares with Him in this, yet "No, indeed! Man has not yet
fulfilled what He commanded him," he has not fulfilled his obligations and so remains deficient in his duty, in need of completing it. Then, after this, Allah directs man's attention to his food, to ponder it, and to ponder how it reaches him after having first passed through many transitions:



VERSE: Then let man look at his food:  how We pouredn down water in abundance,  then We split the earth into furrows. Then We made grain grow in it, and grapes and herbage, and olive and date-palm trees, and gardens of dense, luxurious foliage, and fruit and pasture,  for you and your livestock to enjoy.
INTERPRETATION:"Then let man look to his food, how We poured down water in abundance," sent down in rain in plenitude. "Then We split the earth into furrows," for vegetation "then We made grain grow in it" in all its various types giving rise to delicious foods and delectable provision, "and grapes and herbage, and olive and date-palm trees," these four have specifically been mentioned because of their benefits and advantages, "and gardens of dense, luxurious foliage," containing trees and plants in such plenitude that they are entwined with each other, "and fruit," food that man takes pleasure in eating such as grapes, pomegranates and the likes, "and pasture" as food for cattle and other animals. This is why Allah proceeds to say, "for you and your livestock," which He
created for you and made subservient to you, "to enjoy."



VERSE:But when the Deafening Blast comes, on that Day a man will flee from his brother,  and his mother and his father, and his wife and his children. That Day, each person will have concerns enough of his own. That Day, some faces will be radiant, laughing and rejoicing. That Day, other faces will be covered in dust, gloom overlaying them.Those are the disbelievers, the dissolute.
INTERPRETATION:"But when the Deafening Blast comes," when the cry heralding the Day of Rising comes, a cry whose terror stuns the ears, their very cores are struck with trepidation at what they see of the horrors unfurling before them and at the realisation of the dire need they have of their previous deeds. "On that Day a man will flee," from those he held in the highest regard and were most beloved to him: "from his brother, and his mother and his father, and his wife and his children" because "that Day, each person will have concerns enough of his own," his only concern is his own self and how he can ransom it from the punishment, so much so that he has no care for any other. On this occasion, mankind will be divided into two groups: the felicitous and the wretched. As for the felicitous their "faces will be radiant," showing their extreme joy and delight because they know that they have been successful, "laughing and rejoicing." As for the wretched: "[others] faces will be covered in dust, gloom overlaying them," black, murky, dark; having given up all hope of good, certainty dawning on them of the misery and wretchedness that is their lot. "Those are disbelievers, the dissolute," those who were ungrateful for the blessings of Allah, denied His signs and boldly committed those things He had prohibited. We ask Allah for pardon and well-being, He is the Bestower of Good, the Kind.




Surah: Al Takwir
VERSE:When the sun is contracted, losing its light, when the stars scatter and fall, blinking out, when the mountains are set in motion, when camels ten months pregnant are abandoned,when wild beasts are all herded together,when the seas boil over, when the souls are sorted in classes, when the baby girl buried alive is asked for what sin she was killed,when the scrolls are spread open, when the sky is stripped bare, when Hellfire is stoked to a blaze,  and when Paradise is brought up close:  [each] soul will know what it has brought [with it].
INTERPRETATION:"When the sun is contracted, losing its light," i.e. when the horrifying events mentioned in this chapter unfurl, mankind will be divided into groups and each person will know what he has made ready of good and evil for his Hereafter. On that Day the sun will be folded up, i.e. compacted and extinguished, the moon will eclipse, and both shall be hurled into the Fire. "When the stars scatter and fall, blinking out,"altered and strewn about, away from their heavenly zones. "When the mountains are set in motion," becoming "a heap of running sand"then becoming "like carded wool"then changing into "scattered dust" and destroyed. "When camels ten months pregnant are abandoned," man on that Day shall ignore his most precious commodity, that item which he would keep a watchful eye on and carefully tend to on
all occasions. However, such horror shall be unleashed upon him as would distract him from it. The camel mentioned here is the camel which is about to give birth, and
at that time, to the Arabs, this was their most precious property. Therefore, the camel is used as an example to point to all that man holds dear and precious. "When wild beasts are all herded together," for the Day of Judgement so that Allah may retaliate for any injustices that some of them may have done to others, in this way His servants will see His perfect justice. He will even retaliate for a sheep that was battered by a ram, then He will say to them, „Be dust!" "When the seas boil over," meaning that they will be stoked up and become, despite their massive size and volume, a fuming blaze. "When the souls are sorted in classes," every person will be paired with those who did like deeds, the righteous shall be gathered with the righteous and the iniquitous will be gathered with the iniquitous. The believers will be married to the Hur al-`Ayn whereas the disbelievers will be partnered with the devils. Allah says, "And those who disbelieve are driven to Hell in companies", "And those who keep their duty to their Lord are driven to the Garden in companies", "Assemble those who did wrong, together with their wives and what they used to
worship."When the baby girl, buried alive, is asked," this is a reference to a practice common in the Jahiliyyah where the ignorant would bury a female child alive
for no reason other than the fear of poverty. She will be asked, "for what sin she was killed," it is obvious that she is not guilty of any sin, but the question is asked rhetorically to censure and rebuke those who perpetrated this crime. "When the scrolls" containing a record of man"s good and bad deeds "are spread open," and distributed to their owners. The recipient will receive it with his right hand, or left hand or from behind his back. "When the sky is stripped bare," and disappears as Allah says, "The Day when the heaven with the clouds will be rent asunder", "The Day when We shall roll up the heavens as a recorder rolls up a written
scroll", "When the whole earth is His handful on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens are rolled in His right hand."When Hellfire is stoked to a blaze," giving off a heat that it did not previously have. "And when Paradise is brought up close," to those mindful of Allah. "Each soul will know what it has brought [with it]," the deeds it performed will be presented: "They will find all that they did placed before them." The descriptions of these events that will occur on the Day of Judgement strike the heart with trepidation, increase ones anxieties concerning that Day, seize one with a violent fear, increase one"s apprehensions, encourage the astute to prepare for this Day, and prevent them from doing anything that would deserve rebuke.



VERSE: No! I swear by the receding stars, running [their courses], setting from sight, and by the night as it draws in, and by the dawn as it breathes out: truly it is the speech of a noble Messenger, mighty, securely placed with the Owner of the Throne,obeyed there and trustworthy.
INTERPRETATION: "No! I swear by the receding stars," those planets that fall back from the normal course traversed by stars moving instead towards the east. These are the seven celestial planets: the sun, the moon, Venus, Jupiter, Mars, Saturn and Mercury. These stars map two courses of travel: a course towards the west in line with the rest of the stars and a course towards the east at odds to the rest of the stars. Allah takes on oath by these stars, by their tarrying behind, by their running their course, and by their being concealed by the day. "Running [their course], setting from sight, and by the night as it draws in," i.e. the close of the night and it is also said: the onset of the night, "and the dawn as it breathes out," i.e. the first signs of the morn: the gradual increase of light dissipating the darkness until day dawns and the sun rises. Allah took an oath by these great signs to emphasise the source of the Qur"an, its magnificence and its preservation from every accursed devil: "truly it is the speech of a noble Messenger," Jibril, peace be upon him, who conveyed it from Allah, Most High; "It is a revelation of the Lord of the worlds, which the Faithful Spirit has brought down upon your heart, that you may be (one) of the warners." Allah describes him as being noble due to his excellent morals and manners and his many praiseworthy traits, he is the best of the angels and enjoys the greatest standing with his Lord. "Mighty," stringently enacting what Allah commands him. An example of his might is his raising the homes of the people of Lut, turning them upside down and destroying them. "Securely placed with the Owner of the Throne," Jibril is close to Allah, holding a lofty standing and enjoying a special place above and beyond that which is given to the other angels. "Obeyed there," in the Exalted Company because he is one of the angels brought close, implementing the command of his Lord amongst them, whose opinion is obeyed, "and trustworthy," implementing what Allah orders him to do precisely, without adding, subtracting or overstepping the limits. All of thi proves the excellence of the Qur"an in the sight of Allah, Most High, in that He sent this noble angel, with these perfect qualities, to convey it. It is known that kings only ever send their best and most noble envoys with the most important of tasks and most noble of messages.



VERSE: Your companion is not at all mad: he certainly saw him on the clear horizon. He is not grudging with the unseen, and it is not the word of an accursed devil.  So where, then, are you going? It is nothing but a reminder to the worlds, to those of you who wish to take the right course. But you do not will unless Allah wills, Lord of the worlds.
INTERPRETATION:"Your companion" Muhammad (SAW) "is not at all mad," as claimed by his enemies, the deniers of his message, falsely inventing enormities about him desiring thereby to extinguish the light he brought to the utmost of their ability. Rather, he (SAW) had the greatest of human intellects, the most perspicuous insight, and the most truthful speech. "He" Muhammad (SAW) "certainly saw him" Jibril (AS) "on the clear horizon," the extremity of what is visible to the naked eye. "He is not grudging with the unseen," neither is he of disreputable character such that he would conceal some of what is revealed to him, or add to it or detract from it. Indeed he is the Trusted One in the heaven and the earth; he completely conveyed the messages of his Lord with a "plain conveyance." He did not begrudgingly withhold any of the revelation; not from the rich or the poor, not from a leader or a subject, not from a male or a female, and not from a city dweller or a bedouin. It is for this reason that Allah sent him to an illiterate and ignorant nation, who, by the time he had passed away, had become sagacious scholars and perspicuous saints; knowledge found its heights in them and the ability to understand and derive the finest of details and wisdoms found its peak with them. They became the leaders in their respective disciplines and others were barely able to reach the rank of being their students After Allah mentions the greatness, the superiority and the excellence of His Book by pointing out the two noble Messengers through whose hands it reached mankind, and after having praised them, Allah proceeds to absolve it of any defect or deficiency that would impair its truth, "It is not the word of an accursed devil," far removed from Allah, unworthy of His proximity. "So where, then, are you going," how could such a thought cross your minds? Where have your minds wandered off to? You have thought the truth, reaching the limits of truthfulness, to be aught but lies, reaching the lowest of the low. What is this but a reversal of reality! "It is nothing but a reminder to the worlds," through it are mankind reminded of their Lord, His Perfect Attributes, His being absolved of all defect, lowly traits and similitudes. Through it are they reminded of the injunctions and prohibitions and the wisdoms behind them. Through it are they reminded of the natural laws, the legal laws and the retributional laws. They are reminded of what is good for them in both abodes, and they attain felicity in both abodes by following it. "To those of you who wish to take the right course," after
clear direction has been made plain from idle wandering and guidance from misguidance. "But you do not will unless Allah wills, Lord of the worlds," it is His
will that is implemented and it is not possible to oppose it or contradict it. This verse, and its likes, contains a refutation of the sects of the Qadariyyah, those who denied the decree, and the Jabariyyah, those who held that man had no free will, as has been previously mentioned when commenting on similar verses. And Allah knows best and all praise and thanks are due to Him.



Surah: al Infitar
VERSE: When the sky fractures, when the stars scatter and fall, when the seas are made to rage and erupt, when the graves are overturned and emptied, each soul will know what it has sent ahead and left behind.
INTERPRETATION:"When the sky fractures, when the stars scatter and fall," losing their radiance, and the mountains vanish, "when the seas are made to rage and erupt," becoming one mass of water "when the graves are overturned and emptied," throwing out their dead who are then resurrected for the final Standing before Allah that they may be recompensed for their deeds. "Each soul will know what it has sent ahead and left behind," on that Day the veil will be lifted: what was hidden shall become apparent, and every soul shall realise what it has reaped leading to its success or anguish.



VERSE: O mankind, what has enticed you from your Noble Lord? He who created you, shaped you, proportioned you,  and assembled you in whatever form He willed. No! But you deny the Judgement. [Yet] guardians are standing over you: noble, recording, who know all that you do.
INTERPRETATION:Allah, Most High, proceeds to censure man for his deficiency in fulfilling the rights due to Him and his ever-falling into disobedience, "O mankind, what has enticed you from your Noble Lord," is it that you are care-free of His rights, or is it that you think little of His punishment, or is it that you do not believe in His recompense? Is He not "He who created you, shaped you," "in the finest moulds" "proportioned you," into a well-balanced creation bearing the finest shape and stature? Is it then befitting that you be an ingrate or obstinately refuse to recognise His beneficence? To do so can only arise from ignorance, obstinacy and tyranny on your part. Instead, praise Allah for not making your features like that of a dog or donkey or the likes! This is why Allah proceeds to say, "and assembled you in whatever form He willed." Then He says, "No! But you deny the Judgement," despite this exhortation, despite this admonition, you persist in your denial of the Judgement! Yet you will, without a shadow of doubt, be judged for all that you did, "[Yet] guardians are standing over you," whom Allah has appointed "noble, recording, who know all that you do," of speech and deed: deed of the limb and deed of the heart. It is only befitting that you honour and respect them.



VERSE:The righteous will be in bliss. The dissolute will be in a Blazing Furnace; in it will they roast on the Day of Judgement, never will they be absent from it. [But] what will make you realise what the Day of Judgement is? Again, what will make you realise what the Day of Judgement is? It is a Day when no soul will be able to do anything for another soul; that Day, the command is [entirely] Allah"s.
INTERPRETATION: "The righteous" those who establish the rights of Allah and the rights of His servants. They adhere firmly to righteousness in the deeds of their hearts and the deeds of their limbs. These "will be in bliss,"experiencing this delight in their hearts, souls and bodies; in this life, in the life of the grave and in the Hereafter. "The dissolute" those who were deficient in fulfilling the rights of Allah and the rights of His servants, those whose hearts were filled with iniquity and so there deeds were wicked "will be in a Blazing Furnace," in torment in this world, in the life of the grave, and in the Hereafter. "In it will they roast on the Day of Judgement," the Day of recompense for one's deeds. "Never will they be absent from it," remaining therein forever, never to
leave it. "[But] what will make you realise what the Day of Judgement is? Again, what will make you realise what the Day of Judgement is?" This is said in order to drive home the terror of that Day, a terror that leaves one's mind in disconcerted perplexity! "It is a Day when no soul will be able to do anything for another soul," even if it be of close kin or a loved one. Every person, on that Day, will be concerned with himself and have no care for any other, nor will he ask for the deliverance of any other. "That Day, the command is [entirely] Allah"s," He will judge between His servants and take the right of the oppressed from the oppressor.
Allah knows best.